
\author{Thomas Hobbes}
\authdate{1588--1679}
\textdate{1651}
\addon{Chapters 13 and 17}
\chapter[Leviathan, chaps. 13 and 17]{Leviathan}
\source{hobbes1904}

\page{81}\section*{Chap. XIII. Of the \textsc{Naturall Condition} of
Mankind, as concerning their Felicity, and Misery.}

% NOTE: The positioning of in-paragraph notes assumes letter paper
% with the font at 11pt.

Nature hath made men so equall, in the faculties of body, and mind; as
that \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Man by nature
Equall. \end{wrapfigure} though there bee found one man sometimes
manifestly stronger in body, or of quicker mind then another; yet when
all is reckoned together, the difference between man, and man, is not
so considerable, as that one man can thereupon claim to himselfe any
benefit, to which another may not pretend, as well as he. For as to
the strength of body, the weakest has strength enough to kill the
strongest, either by secret machination, or by confederacy with
others, that are in the same danger with himselfe.

\page{82}And as to the faculties of the mind, (setting aside the arts
grounded upon words, and especially that skill of proceeding upon
generall, and infallible rules, called Science; which very few have,
and but in few things; as being not a native faculty, born with us;
nor attained, (as Prudence,) while we look after somewhat els,) I find
yet a greater equality amongst men, than that of strength. For
Prudence, is but Experience; which equall time, equally bestowes on
all men, in those things they equally apply themselves unto. That
which may perhaps make such equality incredible, is but a vain
conceipt of ones owne wisdome, which almost all men think they have
in a greater degree, than the Vulgar; that is, than all men but
themselves, and a few others, whom by Fame, or for concurring with
themselves, they approve. For such is the nature of men, that
howsoever they may acknowledge many others to be more witty, or more
eloquent, or more learned; Yet they will hardly believe there be many
so wise as themselves: For they see their own wit at hand, and other
mens at a distance. But this proveth rather that men are in that
point equall, than unequall. For there is not ordinarily a greater
signe of the equall distribution of any thing, than that every man is
contented with his share.

From this equality of ability, ariseth equality of hope in the
attaining of our \begin{wrapfigure}[5]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj From
Equality proceeds Diffidence. \end{wrapfigure} Ends. And therefore if
any two men desire the same thing, which neverthelesse they cannot
both enjoy, they become enemies; and in the way to their End, (which
is principally their owne conservation, and sometimes their
delectation only,) endeavour to destroy, or subdue one an other. And
from hence it comes to passe, that where an Invader hath no more to
feare, than an other mans single power; if one plant, sow, build, or
possesse a convenient Seat, others may probably be expected to come
prepared with forces united, to dispossesse, and deprive him, not only
of the fruit of his labour, but also of his life, or liberty. And the
Invader again is in the like danger of another.

And from this diffidence of one another, there is no way for any man
to secure \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj From
Diffidence Warre. \end{wrapfigure} himselfe, so reasonable, as
Anticipation; that is, by force, or wiles, to master the persons of
all men he can, so long, till he see \page{83} no other power great
enough to endanger him: And this is no more than his own conservation
requireth, and is generally allowed. Also because there be some, that
taking pleasure in contemplating their own power in the acts of
conquest, which they pursue farther than their security requires; if
others, that otherwise would be glad to be at ease within modest
bounds, should not by invasion increase their power, they would not be
able, long time, by standing only on their defence, to subsist. And by
consequence, such augmentation of dominion over men, being necessary
to a mans conservation, it ought to be allowed him.

Againe, men have no pleasure, (but on the contrary a great deale of
griefe) in keeping company, where there is no power able to over-awe
them all. For every man looketh that his companion should value him,
at the same rate he sets upon himselfe: And upon all signes of
contempt, or undervaluing, naturally endeavours, as far as he dares
(which amongst them that have no common power to keep them in quiet,
is far enough to make them destroy each other,) to extort a greater
value from his contemners, by dommage; and from others, by the
example.

So that in the nature of man, we find three principall causes of
quarrel. First, Competition; Secondly, Diffidence; Thirdly, Glory.

The first, maketh men invade for Gain; the second, for Safety; and the
third, for Reputation. The first use Violence, to make themselves
Masters of other mens persons, wives, children, and cattell; the
second, to defend them; the third, for trifles, as a word, a smile, a
different opinion, and any other signe of undervalue, either direct in
their Persons, or by reflexion in their Kindred, their Friends, their
Nation, their Profession, or their Name.

Hereby it is manifest, that during the time men live without a common
Power \begin{wrapfigure}[6]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Out of Civil
States, there is alwayes \emph{Warre} of every one against every one.
\end{wrapfigure} to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition
which is called Warre; and such a warre, as is of every man, against
every man. For \textsc{Warre}, consisteth not in Battell onely, or the
act of fighting; but in a tract of time, wherein the Will to contend
by Battell is sufficiently known: and therefore the \page{84} notion
of \textit{Time}, is to be considered in the nature of Warre; as it is
in the nature of Weather. For as the nature of Foule weather, lyeth
not in a showre or two of rain; but in an inclination thereto of many
dayes together: So the nature of War, consisteth not in actual
fighting; but in the known disposition thereto, during all the time
there is no assurance to the contrary. All other time is
\textsc{Peace}.

Whatsoever therefore is consequent to a time of Warre, where every man
is \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj The Incommodities
of such a War. \end{wrapfigure} Enemy to every man; the same is
consequent to the time, wherein men live without other security, than
what their own strength, and their own invention shall furnish them
withall. In such condition, there is no place for Industry; because
the fruit thereof is uncertain: and consequently no Culture of the
Earth; no Navigation, nor use of the commodities that may be imported
by Sea; no commodious Building; no Instruments of moving, and removing
such things as require much force; no Knowledge of the face of the
Earth; no account of Time; no Arts; no Letters; no Society; and which
is worst of all, continuall feare, and danger of violent death; And
the life of man, solitary, poore, nasty, brutish, and short.

It may seem strange to some man, that has not well weighed these
things; that Nature should thus dissociate, and render men apt to
invade, and destroy one another: and he may therefore, not trusting to
this Inference, made from the Passions, desire perhaps to have the
same confirmed by Experience. Let him therefore consider with
himselfe, when taking a journey, he armes himselfe, and seeks to go
well accompanied; when going to sleep, he locks his dores; when even
in his house he locks his chests; and this when he knowes there bee
Lawes, and publike Officers, armed, to revenge all injuries shall bee
done him; what opinion he has of his fellow subjects, when he rides
armed; of his fellow Citizens, when he locks his dores; and of his
children, and servants, when he locks his chests. Does he not there as
much accuse mankind by his actions, as I do by my words? But neither
of us accuse mans nature in it. The Desires, and other Passions of
man, are in themselves no Sin. No more are the Actions, that proceed
from those Passions, till they know a Law that forbids them: which
till Lawes be made they cannot know: nor can any \page{85} Law be
made, till they have agreed upon the Person that shall make it.

It may peradventure be thought, there was never such a time, nor
condition of warre as this; and I believe it was never generally so,
over all the world: but there are many places, where they live so now.
For the savage people in many places of \textit{America}, except the
government of small Families, the concord whereof dependeth on
naturall lust, have no government at all; and live at this day in that
brutish manner, as I said before. Howsoever, it may be perceived what
manner of life there would be, where there were no common Power to
feare; by the manner of life, which men that have formerly lived under
a peacefull government, use to degenerate into, in a civill Warre.

But though there had never been any time, wherein particular men were
in a condition of warre one against another; yet in all times, Kings,
and Persons of Soveraigne authority, because of their Independency,
are in continuall jealousies, and in the state and posture of
Gladiators; having their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one
another; that is, their Forts, Garrisons, and Guns upon the Frontiers
of their Kingdomes; and continuall Spyes upon their neighbours; which
is a posture of War. But because they uphold thereby, the Industry of
their Subjects; there does not follow from it, that misery, which
accompanies the Liberty of particular men.

To this warre of every man against every man, this also is consequent;
that \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj In such a Warre,
nothing is Unjust. \end{wrapfigure} nothing can be Unjust. The notions
of Right and Wrong, Justice and Injustice have there no place. Where
there is no common Power, there is no Law: where no Law, no Injustice.
Force, and Fraud, are in warre, the two Cardinall vertues. Justice,
and Injustice are none of the Faculties neither of the Body, nor Mind.
If they were, they might be in a man that were alone in the world, as
well as his Senses, and Passions. They are Qualities, that relate to
men in Society, not in Solitude. It is consequent also to the same
condition, that there be no Propriety, no Dominion, no \textit{Mine}
and \textit{Thine} distinct; but onely that to be every mans, that he
can get; and for so long, as he can keep it. And thus much for the ill
condition, which man by meer Nature is actually \page{86} placed in;
though with a possibility to come out of it, consisting partly in the
Passions, partly in his Reason.

The Passions that encline men to Peace, are Feare of Death; Desire of
such \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj The Passions that
incline men to Peace. \end{wrapfigure} things as are necessary to
commodious living; and a Hope by their Industry to obtain them. And
Reason suggesteth convenient Articles of Peace, upon which men may be
drawn to agreement. These Articles, are they, which otherwise are
called the Lawes of Nature: whereof I shall speak more particularly,
in the two following Chapters.

% Part II. Of Commom-wealth

\page{115}\section*{Chap. XVII. Of the Causes, Generation, and
Definition of a \textsc{Common-Wealth}.}

The finall Cause, End, or Designe of men, (who naturally love Liberty,
and Do- \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj The End of
Common-wealth, particular Security: \end{wrapfigure} minion over
others,) in the introduction of that restraint upon themselves, (in
which wee see them live in Common-wealths,) is the foresight of their
own preservation, and of a more contented life thereby; that is to
say, of getting themselves out from that miserable condition of Warre,
which is necessarily consequent (as hath been shewn) to the naturall
Passions of men, when there is no visible Power to keep them in awe,

% Hack to get two insets into one paragraph:

\noindent\begin{wrapfigure}[2]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Chap. 13.
\end{wrapfigure} and tye them by feare of punishment to the
performance of their Covenants, and observation of these Lawes of
Nature set down in the fourteenth and fifteenth Chapters.

For the Lawes of Nature (as \textit{Justice, Equity, Modesty, Mercy},
and (in summe) \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Which
is not to be had from the Law Of Nature: \end{wrapfigure}
\textit{doing to others, as wee would be done to},) of themselves,
without the terrour of some Power, to cause them to be observed, are
contrary to our naturall Passions, that carry us to Partiality, Pride,
Revenge, and the like. And Covenants, without the Sword, are but
Words, and of no strength to secure a man at all. Therefore
notwithstanding the Lawes of Nature, (which every one hath then kept,
when he has the will to keep them, when he can do it safely,) if there
be no Power erected, or not great enough for our security; every man
will, and may lawfully rely on his own strength and art, for caution
against all other men. And in all places, \page{116} where men have
lived by small Families, to robbe and spoyle one another, has been a
Trade, and so farre from being reputed against the Law of Nature, that
the greater spoyles they gained, the greater was their honour; and men
observed no other Lawes therein, but the Lawes of Honour; that is, to
abstain from cruelty, leaving to men their lives, and instruments of
husbandry. And as small Familyes did then; so now do Cities and
Kingdomes which are but greater Families (for their own security)
enlarge their Dominions, upon all pretences of danger, and fear of
Invasion, or assistance that may be given to Invaders, endeavour as
much as they can, to subdue, or weaken their neighbours, by open
force, and secret arts, for want of other Caution, justly; and are
rememdbred for it in after ages with honour.

Nor is it the joyning together of a small number of men, that gives
them this \begin{wrapfigure}[5]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Nor from the
conjunction of a few men or familyes: \end{wrapfigure} security;
because in small numbers, small additions on the one side or the
other, make the advantage of strength so great, as is sufficient to
carry the Victory; and therefore gives encouragement to an Invasion.
The Multitude sufficient to confide in for our Security, is not
determined by any certain number, but by comparison with the Enemy we
feare; and is then sufficient, when the odds of the Enemy is not of so
visible and conspicuous moment, to determine the event of warre, as to
move him to attempt.

And be there never so great a Multitude; yet if their actions be
directed according \begin{wrapfigure}[5]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Nor
from a great Multitude, unlesse directed by one judgement:
\end{wrapfigure} to their particular judgements, and particular
appetites, they can expect thereby no defence, nor protection, neither
against a Common enemy, nor against the injuries of one another. For
being distracted in opinions concerning the best use and application
of their strength, they do not help, but hinder one another; and
reduce their strength by mutuall opposition to nothing: whereby they
are easily, not onely subdued by a very few that agree together; but
also when there is no common enemy, they make warre upon each other,
for their particular interests. For if we could suppose a great
Multitude of men to consent in the observation of Justice, and other
Lawes of Nature, without a common Power to keep them all in awe; we
might \page{117} as well suppose all Man-kind to do the same; and then
there neither would be, nor need to be any Civill Government, or
Common-wealth at all; because there would be Peace without subjection.

Nor is it enough for the security, which men desire should last all
the time of \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj And that
continually. \end{wrapfigure} their life, that they be governed, and
directed by one judgement, for a limited time; as in one Battell, or
one Warre. For though they obtain a Victory by their unanimous
endeavour against a forraign enemy; yet afterwards, when either they
have no common enemy, or he that by one part is held for an enemy, is
by another part held for a friend, they must needs by the difference
of their interests dissolve, and fall again into a Warre amongst
themselves.

It is true, that certain living creatures, as Bees, and Ants, live
sociably one with \begin{wrapfigure}[8]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Why
certain creatures without reason, or speech, do neverthelesse live in
Society, without any coercive Power. \end{wrapfigure} another, (which
are therefore by \textit{Aristotle} numbred amongst Politicall
creatures;) and yet have no other direction, than their particular
judgements and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of them can signifie
to another, what he thinks expedient for the common benefit: and
therefore some man may perhaps desire to know, why Man-kind cannot do
the same. To which I answer,

First, that men are continually in competition for Honour and Dignity,
which these creatures are not; and consequently amongst men there
ariseth on that ground, Envy and Hatred, and finally Warre; but
amongst these not so.

Secondly, that amongst these creatures, the Common good differeth not
from the Private; and being by nature enclined to their private, they
procure thereby the common benefit. But man, whose Joy consisteth in
comparing himselfe with other men, can relish nothing but what is
eminent.

Thirdly, that these creatures, having not (as man) the use of reason,
do not see, nor think they see any fault, in the administration of
their common businesse: whereas amongst men, there are very many, that
thinke themselves wiser, and abler to govern the Publique, better than
the rest; and these strive to reforme and innovate, one this way,
another that way; and thereby bring it into Distraction and Civill
warre.

\page{118}Fourthly, that these creatures, though they have some use of
voice, in making knowne to one another their desires, and other
affections; yet they want that art of words, by which some men can
represent to others, that which is Good, in the likenesse of Evill;
and Evill, in the likenesse of Good; and augment, or diminish the
apparent greatnesse of Good and Evill; discontenting men, and
troubling their Peace at their pleasure.

Fiftly, irrationall creatures cannot distinguish betweene
\textit{Injury}, and \textit{Damm\-age}; and therefore as long as they
be at ease, they are not offended with their fellowes: whereas Man is
then most troublesome, when he is most at ease: for then it is that he
loves to shew his Wisdome, and controule the Actions of them that
governe the Common-wealth.

Lastly, the agreement of these creatures is Naturall; that of men, is
by Covenant only, which is Artificiall: and therefore it is no wonder
if there be somewhat else required (besides Covenant) to make their
Agreement constant and lasting; which is a Common Power, to keep them
in awe, and to direct their actions to the Common Benefit.

The only way to erect such a Common Power, as may be able to defend
them \begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj The Generation of
a Common- wealth. \end{wrapfigure} from the invasion of Forraigners,
and the injuries of one another, and thereby to secure them in such
sort, as that by their owne industrie, and by the fruites of the
Earth, they may nourish themselves and live contentedly; is, to
conferre all their power and strength upon one Man, or upon one
Assembly of men, that may reduce all their Wills, by plurality of
voices, unto one Will: which is as much as to say, to appoint one Man,
or Assembly of men, to beare their Person; and every one to owne, and
acknowledge himselfe to be Author of whatsoever he that so beareth
their Person, shall Act, or cause to be Acted, in those things which
concerne the Common Peace and Safetie; and therein to submit their
Wills, every one to his Will, and their Judgements, to his Judgment.
This is more than Consent, or Concord; it is a reall Unitie of them
all, in one and the same Person, made by Covenant of every man with
every man, in such manner, as if every man should say to every man,
\textit{I Authorise and give up my Right of Governing my selfe, to
this Man, or to this Assembly of men, on \page{119} this condition,
that thou give up thy Right to him, and Authorise all his Actions in
like manner}. This done, the Multitude so united in one Person, is
called a \textsc{Common-wealth}, in latine \textsc{Civitas}. This is
the Generation of that great \textsc{Leviathan}, or rather (to speake
more reverently) of that \textit{Mortall God}, to which wee owe under
the \textit{Immortall God}, our peace and defence. For by this
Authoritie, given him by every particular man in the Common-Wealth, he
hath the use of so much Power and Strength conferred on him, that by
terror thereof, he is inabled to forme the wills of them all, to Peace
at home, and mutuall ayd against their enemies abroad. And in him
consisteth the Essence of the Common-wealth; which (to define

% Hack to get two insets into one paragraph:

\noindent\begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj The
Definition of a Common- wealth. \end{wrapfigure} it,) is \textit{One
Person, of whose Acts a great Multitude, by mutuall Covenants one with
another, have made themselves every one the Author, to the end he may
use the strength and means of them all, as he shall think expedient,
for their Peace and Common Defence}.

\begin{wrapfigure}[4]{o}{0.18\textwidth}\wrapadj Soveraigne, and
Subject, what. \end{wrapfigure}

And he that carryeth this Person, is called \textsc{Soveraigne}, and
said to have \textit{Soveraigne Power}; and every one besides, his
\textsc{Subject}.

The attaining to this Soveraigne Power, is by two wayes. One, by
Naturall force; as when a man maketh his children, to submit
themselves, and their children to his government, as being able to
destroy them if they refuse; or by Warre subdueth his enemies to his
will, giving them their lives on that condition. The other, is when
men agree amongst themselves, to submit to some Man, or Assembly of
men, voluntarily, on confidence to be protected by him against all
others. This later, may be called a Politicall Common-wealth, or
Common-wealth by \textit{Institution}; and the former, a Common-wealth
by \textit{Acquisition}. And first, I shall speak of a Common-wealth
by Institution.

